---

copyright:
  years: 2025
lastupdated: "2025-12-09" 

keywords: activity , cloud logs

subcollection: EventStreams-gen2

---

{{site.data.keyword.attribute-definition-list}}

# {{site.data.keyword.cloudaccesstrailshort}} events
{: #at_events}

[Gen 2]{: tag-purple}

{{site.data.keyword.messagehub}} Gen 2 is currently in Beta. Beta offerings are provided exclusively for evaluation and testing purposes. They are not covered by warranties, SLAs, or support, and are not intended for production use. {{site.data.keyword.ibm}} strongly recommends avoiding non-GA features in production environments. [Learn more here.](/link to beta reference page)
{: beta}

Use the {{site.data.keyword.logs_full}} service to track how users and applications interact with the {{site.data.keyword.messagehub}} service on the various {{site.data.keyword.messagehub}} service plans in {{site.data.keyword.cloud}}.
{: shortdesc}

The {{site.data.keyword.logs_full_notm}} service records user-initiated activities that change the state of a service in {{site.data.keyword.cloud_notm}}. For more information, see [{{site.data.keyword.logs_full_notm}}](/docs/cloud-logs?topic=cloud-logs-at_events){: external}.

Events are formatted according to the Cloud Auditing Data Federation (CADF) standard. For further details of the information they include, see [CADF standard](/docs/atracker?topic=atracker-about).

## Topic events
{: #topic-events}

{{site.data.keyword.messagehub}} instances that are on the Enterprise plans or the Standard plan automatically generate topic events.

The following table lists the topic events:

| Action | Description |
|:-------|:------------|
| event-streams.topic.create | An event is created when you create a topic.|
| event-streams.topic.delete | An event is created when you delete a topic.|
| event-streams.topic.update | An event is created when you update a topic's configuration or increase partitions.|

{: caption="{{site.data.keyword.messagehub}} topic events" caption-side="top"}

Additional information about topic configuration is logged in the update and delete events,  for example partitions, `retentionMs`, and `segmentMs`.

## Message audit events
{: #message-events}

You can enable message audit events on a per topic basis for {{site.data.keyword.messagehub}} instances that are on the `Enterprise Gen2 plan`.
Also, see [How to enable message audit events](/docs/EventStreams?topic=EventStreams-at_events#enable-message-events).

The following table lists the message audit events:

| Action | Description |
|:-------|:------------|
| event-streams.message.read | An event is created when message audit is enabled on a topic and a consumer is reading data from the topic.|
| event-streams.message.write | An event is created when message audit is enabled on a topic and a producer is writing data to the topic.|
| event-streams.message.delete | An event is created when message audit is enabled on a topic and records are deleted from the topic. Records deletion because of retention policy does not generate.|
{: caption="{{site.data.keyword.messagehub}} message events" caption-side="top"}

{{site.data.keyword.messagehub}} can sustain high request rates, so not every request triggers an event. Instead, events are aggregated by initiator (user ID or service ID), host (IP address), operation (read, write, delete), outcome (success or failure), and topic over a 1-hour period.

## Other events
{: #other-events}

{{site.data.keyword.messagehub}} instances that are on the `Enterprise Gen2 plan` automatically generate events so that you can track activity on your service.

| Action | Description |
|:-------|:------------|
| event-streams.storage-key.read | Key management events are now created by the underlying block storage, which are described [here](/docs/vpc?topic=vpc-at_events#events-block-storage). |
| event-streams.storage-key.update | Key management events are now created by the underlying block storage, which are described [here](/docs/vpc?topic=vpc-at_events#events-block-storage). |

{: caption="{{site.data.keyword.messagehub}} events" caption-side="top"}

## Where to view the events
{: #ui}

{{site.data.keyword.logs_full_notm}} events are available in the {{site.data.keyword.logs_full_notm}} **account domain** that is available in the {{site.data.keyword.cloud_notm}} location (region) where the events are generated.

Events that are generated by an instance of the {{site.data.keyword.messagehub}} service are automatically forwarded to the {{site.data.keyword.logs_full_notm}} service instance that is available in the same location.

{{site.data.keyword.logs_full_notm}} can have only one instance per location. To view events, you must access the web UI of the {{site.data.keyword.logs_full_notm}} service in the same location where your service instance is available. For more information, see [Launch the Cloud Logs UI](/docs/cloud-logs?topic=cloud-logs-getting-started#gs-access-ui){: external}.

## How to enable message audit events
{: #enable-message-events}

**HOW DO WE DO THIS WITHOUT THE EVS CLI ? - Charlie? **


Message audit events can be enabled on a per topic basis. To do so, complete the following steps:

1. Install {{site.data.keyword.messagehub}} CLI plug-in v2.3 or later:

   ```sh
   ibmcloud plugin install event-streams
   ```
   {: pre}

2. Enable message audit on an existing topic:

   ```sh
   ibmcloud es topic-update <topic-name> --config message.audit.enable=true
   ```
   {: pre}

   Or create a new topic with message audit enabled:

   ```sh
   ibmcloud es topic-create <topic-name> --partitions <number-of-partitions> --config message.audit.enable=true
   ```
   {: pre}

After the topic's message audit config is updated, it takes about 5 minutes for message audit events to show up in {{site.data.keyword.cloudaccesstrailshort}}.
{: important}

Additionally, be aware of the implications of enabling message audit events:

1. An internal Kafka topic is used for streaming events to {{site.data.keyword.logs_full_notm}}, thus it uses a small amount of the cluster's network bandwidth and storage. Typically throughput is less than 1 KB/s, and storage does not exceed 1 GB.

2. Because more events are sent to {{site.data.keyword.logs_full_notm}}, enabling message audit events incurs extra storage costs for {{site.data.keyword.logs_full_notm}}. Each event's size is about 1 KB, see the following rough estimation of how much storage it takes. Assuming that the cluster has 100 topics, each topic has 10 clients actively producing and consuming, and each client runs on three different locations. It then generates 100x10x3=3000 events per hour, so 2 GB per month.
